The Supreme Court of India has ruled that a delay in the conclusion of a trial and a higher threshold for the grant of bail cannot go together. The court stated that it is a well-settled principle of Indian criminal jurisprudence that "bail is the rule, and jail is the exception." Stringent provisions regarding the grant of bail, such as Section 45(1)(iii) of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), cannot be used to incarcerate the accused without trial for an unreasonably long time.

The court cited a series of decisions, starting from the case of K.A. Najeeb, which hold that such stringent provisions for the grant of bail do not take away the power of Constitutional Courts to grant bail on the grounds of violation of Part III of the Constitution of India. The court stated that if there is no likelihood of a trial being completed in a reasonable time, and the period of incarceration already undergone has exceeded a substantial part of the prescribed sentence, the Constitutional Courts can grant bail.

The court also stated that the power to grant bail can be exercised by the Constitutional Courts on the grounds of violation of Part III of the Constitution of India, notwithstanding the statutory provisions. The court can exercise its jurisdiction under Article 32 or Article 226 of the Constitution, as the case may be.

In the present case, the appellant had been incarcerated for 15 months or more for an offence punishable under the PMLA. The trial of the scheduled offences and the PMLA offence was not likely to be completed in three to four years or even more. The court held that if the appellant's detention was continued, it would amount to an infringement of his fundamental right under Article 21 of the Constitution of India of a speedy trial.

The court allowed the appeal and granted bail to the appellant on certain conditions, including furnishing bail bonds, not contacting or communicating with prosecution witnesses and victims, marking attendance at the office of the Deputy Director, and regularly and punctually remaining present before the courts dealing with scheduled offences.

The court also stated that in cases where clean acquittal is granted by the criminal courts to the accused after very long incarceration as an undertrial, crucial years in the life of the accused are lost, and it may amount to a violation of the rights of the accused under Article 21 of the Constitution, which may give rise to a claim for compensation.